2019-06-04
writing "example" draft for MITACS workshop

The Leech Water Supply Area (Land, Water, Fire)
	
The Leech River Watershed is a sub-catchment of the Sooke River watershed,located on southeastern Vancouver Island, British Columbia. In 2007 and 2010, 96.28 km2 (9,628 hectares) of land was purchased by the Capital Regional District (CRD) and designated as a water supply area (WSA) for the Greater Victoria Area. 
The CRD currently sources Greater Victoria's water supply from five surface water reservoirs in the Sooke and Goldstream watersheds (109.27 km2  total). In anticipation of future water demands, the CRD purchased a large portion of the Leech River watershed. The CRD owns 205.49 km2 (20,549 hectares) of catchment lands which are protected as part of the multiple-barrier approach to clean drinking water. 
To meet future water demands, water from the Leech River will be transferred through a diversion tunnel to Sooke Reservoir to supplement the primary drinking water source. Approximately 92% of the Leech River watershed above the point of diversion (tunnel) is protected is protected as WSA. 
Previously, the Leech Water Supply Area (LWSA) was privately managed forest land, and was extensively harvested (nearly 96% clearcut) over the past 70 years; a large portion of the WSA is forested with softwood stands less than 35 years of age.    
The second growth forests of the LWSA are no longer managed for timber supply, they are now managed to improve drinking source water quality and to reduce the risk of landscape level wildfire. Due to harvest, reforestation and active fire suppression, forest fire fuels have accumulated and pose a threat for fire spread, in the event of a fire breaking out in a nearby community or within the WSA. The CRD implements forest treatments designed to foster healthy forest stands capable of reducing fire intensity, such as reducing fuel hazards and creating conditions that are safe for crews to action a fire.   
The Leech River watershed is in the Coastal Western Hemlock biogeoclimatic zone (CWH), with forests dominated by Douglas-fir, western hemlock and western red cedar; subspecies include white pine, amabalis fir, alder, broad-leaf maple and arbutus. The watershed also includes the moist and dry maritime sub-zones of the CWH (Montane moist 43%, submontane moist 38%, xeric 19%). 
While some precipitation occurs as snow at higher elevations, the majority of the ~2500 mm per year is rain (pluvial hydroclimatic regime). The water year can be broadly divided into wet and dry seasons: approximately 90% of precipitation falls from September to April (primarily Oct-Feb), and May through August is regularly in drought (~215 - 330mm rain). 
The Leech River watershed includes three mainstem rivers (Cragg Creek, Leech River, and West Leech River) as well as several lakes (Weeks, Jarvis, and Worley) and wetlands (Jordan Meadows surrounding Weeks Lake). 



Drinking Water Regulations

Island Health is the Vancouver Island Health Authority which oversees drinking water systems regulated under the provincial Drinking Water Protection Act and Drinking Water Protection Regulation frameworks. 
The Act sets out requirements for drinking water operators & suppliers to ensure the provision of safe drinking water 
The CRD complies with all drinking water requirements as well as several that are not enforced in the province of BC
Drinking water from the Greater Victoria Water Supply undergoes the following treatment:
unfiltered -> 1: UV + free chlorine -> 2: ammonia (chloramine)
The CRD is planning for the combination of source water supplies (LWSA + Sooke Reservoir). 
Timing of supply: Leech River watershed receives more precipitation than Sooke watershed  
History of harvest: the Leech was harvested recently, compared to the Sooke
Possible changes to treatment requirement

Profiling Stormflow with Vertical Sampling
The streams in the Leech River watershed respond rapidly to rainfall events, they are “flashy” streams.
How important is it to capture the surges of water that follow a precipitation event, the stormflow?
Would collecting standard grab samples be informative enough to understand the water quality dynamics in this new water supply area?
How can stormflow inform treatment requirements?

Preliminary Monitoring
Assess physical and chemical parameters of the Leech Water Supply Area source water & identify potential areas of interest for future monitoring, and understand the Leech system

Rack Sample Benefits
Low power (two 1/2 AA lithium batteries, 3.6V, 1.2Ah)
Self-contained. No external data logger, battery, solar panel
Passive collection (siphon sampling, no pumps)
Customizable rack design

Increase sampling frequency
Over 7 site visits (Oct 2018 – Apr 2019), a total of 148 samples were collected 
Grab samples: 45	|	Rack samples: 103
More representative than regular grab sampling
Grab sample DOC results were ~35% lower than results obtained from samples collected on vertical racks 

Inform Treatability
Monitoring Leech River water quality in collaboration with forWater research partners will provide insights for treatment strategy
 
Coordinated Efforts 
CRD Hydrology is acquiring streamflow, turbidity and temperature at 3 of these sites
Paired time-series of stream-level (to be flow) and water quality conditions can help to inform decisions on when and how to best utilize Leech River water 
With a coupled data-set, “rule-curves” can be created to support decisions about water diversion through the tunnel to ensure water quality drinking standards are maintained
This research assists in quantifying the availability and variability of Leech River water as supplemental water for the GVWSA
In addition to samples for forWater analysis, water is collected at each of these six sites and sent to Maxxam Labs for analysis of a suite of metals and dissolved minerals

Robust Sampling
Stormflow profiles provide robust representation of water quality changes over time

Still to Come
Falling stage sampling device
To passively capture discrete water samples as river level recedes 
Data analysis of additional water quality parameters (not shown here):
Nitrate, total organic carbon, turbidity
Metals and hardness
Organic matter can bind and carry dissolved metals 
Monitor effects of experimental forest treatments (e.g. prescribed burn, fuel management)

www2.gov.bc.ca/gov/content/environment/air-land-water/water/water-quality/drinking-water-quality
www.crd.bc.ca/service/drinking-water/watershed-protection/leech-water-supply-area-future-water-supply
www.bcwatertool.ca 
CRD Regional Water Supply, 2017, Strategic Plan for the Regional Water Supply System Serving Greater Victoria
CRD Watershed Protection Division, Integrated Water Services, 2015 (2009), Leech River Assessment Final Report


This project isn’t possible without the support and encouragement from the forWater Network, and support, help and ground-control from CRD Watershed Protection Division of Integrated Water Services. 
A special thanks to CRD staff Tobi Gardner, Annette Constabel, Joel Ussery, Patrick McCoubrey, Ryan Biggs, Kathy Haesevoats, Burn Hemus, Christoph Moch, Jessica Dupuis, and Nigel Burrows.
Thanks to forWater folks Mike Stone, Dana Harriman, Monica Emelko, Uldis Silins, Danielle Lindamood, Allie Dusome – thank you all for the help. Special thanks to my supervisors, Bill Floyd and Mark Johnson. 
Thanks to my Ecohydrology lab mates. Thanks to Maartje Korver for siphon design prototypes. 
And huge thanks to my friend and field partner from the Coastal Hydrology & Climate Change Research Lab, Stewart Butler, for helping with field installations during the wettest and coldest part of 2018.














The CRD has 205.49 km2 (20,549 hectares) of protected drinking water source catchment lands:
Primary supply source: Sooke Lake Watershed & Reservoir System
Secondary supply source: Goldstream Watershed & Reservoir System
Supplemental source: Council Watershed







