working files are confusing. I have them separated by vertical rack, grab (sample type) and analytical method (spectrolyser and shimadzu).

What if I make a master list with 
	site
	sample type (grab or rack or QA-QC)
	sample (rack level or grab or RO/calver)
	trip (integer ID of associated trip, for grouping and matching)
	sample stage (for rack samples)
	collection_date (for grab, blank cell for rack to be filled in R)
	collection_time (for grab, blank cell for rack to be filled in R)
	analytical_instrument (shimadzu or spectrolyser)
	analysis_date_TOC (date analyzed on Shimadzu TOC-V)
	analysis_date_Scan (date analyzed on Spectrolyser)
	DOC_NPOC (mg/L DOC, results from filtered samples on Shimadzu)
	TOC_NPOC (mg/L TOC, results from unfiltered samples on Shimadzu)
	DOC_scan (mg/L OC, results from Spectrolyser)
	TOC_scan (mg/L OC, results from Spectrolyser)
	turbidity_scan (FTU, results from Spectrolyser)
	NO3-N_scan (mg/L nitrate-nitrogen, results from Spectrolyser)
	
	I was separately tracking bottle heights, but because not all bottles fill and are often rearranged much of that data is unused. what if I only record the bottle height from field notes for samples that were analyzed. Then there's no need to match bottle height files (which gets confusing. 
	
	No wait - shimadzu output is long format and spectrolyser is wide
	Shimadzu was used for TOC analysis only very early. I can keep that as a separate column
	merge results from spec with shim (they will henceforth be used in tandem for analysis
	
	
metals

	export from PDF to spreadsheet
	save as .csv and reopen - all formatting is gone
	
	MAC,AO,OG: The guidelines that have been included in this report have been taken from the Canadian Drinking Water Quality Summary Table, February 2017.
Criteria A = Maximum Acceptable Concentration (MAC)
Criteria B = Aesthetic Objectives (AO)  
Criteria C = Operational Guidance Values (OG)
It is recommended to consult these guidelines when interpreting your data since there are non-numerical guidelines that are not included on this report.
Turbidity Guidelines:
1. Chemically assisted filtration: less than or equal to 0.3 NTU in 95% of the measurements or 95% of the time each month.  Shall not exceed 1.0 NTU at any time.
2. Slow sand / diatomaceous earth filtration: less than or equal to 1.0 NTU in 95% of the measurements or 95% of the time each month.  Shall not exceed 3.0 NTU at any time.
3. Membrane filtration: less than or equal to 0.1 NTU in 99% of the measurements made or at least 99% of the time each calendar month.  Shall not exceed 0.3 NTU at any time.
4. To ensure effectiveness of disinfection and for good operation of the distribution system, it is recommended that water entering the distribution system have turbidity levels of 1.0 NTU or less.
Measurement of Uncertainty has not been accounted for when stating conformity to the selected criteria, where applicable.
Results relate only to the items tested.


I might need to match DOC and metals by hand... not sure how to do it in R right now...
When I have time, figure out how to pull metals results from the PDFs directly and wrangle/clean... and figure out how to merge in R
	