CGU - Poster Abstract

Monitoring source water quality and hydrologic dynamics is a crucial part of a multi-barrier approach to clean drinking water. 
In a riverine system, hydrochemical pulses have a range of magnitudes, timings and relationships amongst sub-catchments. 
As the majority of drinking water in Canada originates in forested headwaters, forest management is intimately tied to drinking water supplies for many communities. There are many ways in which forest management can effect the hydrology of a catchment, as well as the water quality. However, without a baseline understanding of hydrochemical dynamics, it's difficult to say whether observations fit within baseline variability or indicate a departure from a catchment's range due to forest prescriptions. 

As part of the NSERC 'forWater' Network for Forested Drinking Water Source Protection Technologies, this research was conducted in partnership with a regional protected water supply to characterize the relative ranges of hydrochemical dynamics and the syncrony of rainfall response among subbasins. Six subbasin sites were equipped with vertical sampling racks to continuously log river stage and passively collect water samples on the rising limb of the hydrograph. Samples were analyzed for dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and dissolved organic matter (DOM) through high temperature combustion and UV-Vis spectroscopy (respectively) to assess landscape connectivity, and a subset of samples were analyzed for a suite of metals to assess DOM transport relationships. 

As a case study, understanding the baseline of hydrochemical dynamics in this protected water supply area can help pave the way for future experimental forest treatments, such as preventative forest fuel management, and can help to anticipate changes in treatment requirements due to hydrodynamic forcing across the watershed. More broadly, these analyses add to our understanding of "natural" variability across a recently undisturbed second growth forested catchment.  

This research explored the spatial and temporal dynamics of hydrochemcial synchrony 
 