Surface water samples were collected between October 2018 and February 2020 to measure dissolved organic carbon (DOC) concentration and natural organic matter (NOM) character through space and time in the Greater Victoria Water Supply Area (GVWSA).Samples were analyzed at UBC for DOC concentration and NOM character via high temperature combustion and UV-Vis spectroscopy, respectively. The sampling program designed for this project included synoptic sampling of 12 sites across the Sooke and Leech water supply areas (WSA), as well as installation of monitoring and sampling stations at 6 sites in the Leech WSA. Results of synoptic sampling analyses were used to elucidate spatial and temporal patterns in NOM and DOC.

Aqueous forms of NOM in freshwater play important ecological roles but can be problematic for drinking water treatment because they increase oxidant demand (e.g. chlorination), contribute to the formation of disinfection by-products, and cause other disruptions (e.g. short filter run times, microbial bio-fouling, coagulant demand). Because the backbone of NOM is carbon, DOC is a measure of the dissolved forms of NOM in a sample. While quantifying a sample's DOC is important in describing the amount of NOM, it tells us nothing about the structure (and therefore the function) of that material. Characterizing molecular attributes in addition to quantifying NOM provides greater insight than quantification alone; therefore, both quantification of DOC and characterization of NOM were tackled for this project. 


Natural organic matter (NOM) is a complex assembly of carbon-based molecules that exhibit dynamic variability across watersheds due to interconnected biotic and abiotic processes. NOM is a complicated medley of molecules so it can be challenging to quantify, but measuring organic carbon (the backbone of NOM) is standard and thus organic carbon is quantified as a surrogate for NOM. The molecular character of NOM can vary from large, highly aromatic compounds to smaller more aliphatic molecules and the differences in molecular makeup can be attributed to the source of NOM (e.g. terrestrial humic substances or in-stream algae, i.e. allochthonous or autochthonous NOM). Concentrations and character of NOM vary over space and time. The river continuum concept predicts a temporal shift in NOM character from autochthonous (e.g. algal) to allochthonous (e.g. humic material) sources, and a spatial reduction in NOM molecular diversity from headwaters to river mouth. The river continuum concept (RCC) explains temporal changes in NOM character through variable mobilization of source material and biogeochemical processing. Spatial-scaling of NOM diversity is attributed to hydrological processes and most watershed characteristics, including: geomorphic variables; physical impoundments; organic matter inputs and sources; sediment transport; solar inputs; and processing by aquatic invertebrates and microbes [@Vannote1980; @Stanley2012; @Aiken2011; @Zarnetske2018]. 