MSc CRD forWater Research Plan 

{INSTERESTS}
	exploring an understudied area (Leech)
	changes in water quality over space - 3 main stems from different head water types and different geologies
	changes in water quality over time - seasonal changes over a year (4 seasons), and changes within stormflow
	identifying the origins of streamflow flow paths (seasonally) based on DOM character
		groundwater derived baseflow
		shallow subsurface soil water flow / pre-event water
		overland flow
		direct channel precipitation
	characterizing treatability across seasons
		mixing study of Leech with Sooke/Deception Gulch water and changes in treatability dynamics
	
OBJECTIVES
	Identify temporal and Spatial variations and differences in DOC concentration, DOM character
		RESEARCH QUESTIONS (based on scale of temporal and spatial changes):
			A. Spatial Scale Research Questions:
				1.Is Wetland charcter maintained or diluted from head to mouth?
				2.Is there a dominant signature from one of the 3 mainstems in the source water near Leech Tunnel?
			B. Temporal Scale Research Questions:
				1. Over a storm, how much higher is [DOC] in the hydrograph rising limb than falling, and how does the DOM character change over the course of an event?
				2. What are the seasonal variations and differences in [DOC] + DOM character? 
				3. *If possible* Characterize the source of stormflow DOM + How much stormflow (what portion of the hydrograph) is pre-event water? AND how does that change over a year?
		HYPOTHESES:	
			A1. Wetland character will be diluted along the length of Leech River
			A2. If there is a signature from one mainstem, is may shift seasonally
			B1.+B2. [DOC] is dominant in the rising limb and will have a stronger landscape signature in the fall than the spring
			B3. Stormflow following antecedant dry conditions will result in greater proportions of pre-event water
TASKS:
	Identify sites
		SITE RATIONALE
			1 - Weeks Outlet Leech Head -- character of Fen
			2 - Cragg Creek -- Character of east mainstem
			3 - Leech Below Cragg Confluence -- is there wetland character remaining or does this water look more like Cragg Creek?
			4 - West Leech -- Character of west mainstem
			5 - Leech Below West Confluence -- wetland character remaining? Dominant signature of either mainstem?
			6 - Leech near Tunnel -- Any noteable character of mainstems? 
				+ DBP-FP in source water --> Waterloo
				+ BDP-FP for different mixed ratios (Matching Mazumder's ratios) of Deception Gulch water with Leech Source 
			7 - NE Trib (culvert) to Weeks Lake -- less fenny inlet
			8 - SE Weeks Lake -- is the Lake character dominant in Outlet/Leech Head?
			9 - NW Trib (cobble bed) to Weeks Lake -- more fenny inlet + near TimberWest land (active harvest)
				+ Phillips samplers deployed for Mike Stone
			10 - West Jordan Creek -- TimberWest fresh roads, harvest maybe spring 2019
			* not included but should be 
				* Leech River East Head from Worley Lake headwaters -- non-wetland headwaters of Leech River (what's character?)
				* Leech River head below East/West confluence -- is there wetland signature here? IF NOT, why would you excpect it to get to the south confluence?
				* stream from TimberWest at most NW corner of CRD land (North of fresh cut/roads)
				* stream from TimberWest South of Site 10
	Instal Equipment
		Vertical rack samplers
			Rising limb sample collection with time stamps at each stage
		Phillips Samplers
			Passive collection of fine suspended sediment 
		MAYBE Horizontal/roticery-float samplers	
			falling limb sample collection with time stamp
	Perform Field Work
		Site visits
			collect water samples for analysis at UBC
				+ samples for CRD to have analyzed for metals at Maxxam
				+ sediment for Mike Stone at main stems near confluence and maybe the TimberWest Site(s)
				+ source water for DBP-FP experiments - Monica Emelko
					provide whole source water PLUS a range of mixing ratio samples of Leech + Deception Gulch water
			download stage data
			perform velocity measurements at culverts (for Q calculation)
			renew rack sampler bottles		
		Re-assess sites and methods when sampling is underway
			re-establish or improve site locations (access) if needed
			augment methods when/where appropriate
		Maintain equipment	
			Repair damage and update desings as needed
			Batteries
METHODS:
	Lab Analysis: 
		DOC+POC concentration and ratio quantification - Shimadzu TOC-V analyzer 
		DOM optical/molecular characterization - Aqualog spectrofluorometer + PARFAC analysis
		Stable isotope analysis (maybe) - PICARRO cavity ringdown spectrometer
	Field Work: 
		Vertical rack sampler - rising limb sample collection with time stamps at each stage
		Grab samples	
		Q measurements at culverts (velocity-area) + Q with Tobi when approproiate / helpful
		Soil water extraction - if origin water remains of interest and is manageable within the timeframe
	Data Work:
		PARAFAC analysis of DOM optical data
		Work up historical data of WQ parameters (provided)
		BC protocol for watershed characterization (desktop framework)
			scale of forest regeneration
OUTCOME
	Publication
		Automatic sampler design for passive sampling of recession limb stormflow
		Origins of stormflow 
	Graph 
		hydrograph showing relative [DOC] over time
		hydrograph showing changed in DOM character over time (aromatic -> aliphatic character)
	Table/matrices (seaonal hydroclimatic attributes 
		Columns = landcover (Scale of forest regeneration (young, medium, old) + Fen)
		Rows = Seasonal Flow Regime (rain-event, rain-on-snow, snow-melt, low-flow)
		Values
			[DOC] concentration (+/- std) 
			DOM character (more or less aromatic)
			DBP-FP hazard/risk ("high/med/low")
			Q or stage ?
