The principle application of passive rising limb sampler was  to collect discrete water samples during the rising limb of stormflow without employing costly pump-samplers, external (e.g 12V) batteries, or data loggers. The deployment of vertical racks for passive rising limb sample collection was completed for six selected locations, which profoundly increased sampling frequency and allowed for simultaneous collection of stormflow samples across the Leech watershed. The passive sampling bottles utilize the principles of a siphon design to collect river water as it reaches pre-determined levels on a vertical sampling rack. 

The primary drawback of the vertical sampling racks was that they did not collect water samples on the falling limb of the hydrograph (as water level drops to pre-storm levels or baseflow). 

# Falling limb sampler design

In keeping with goals of low-cost, low-powered passive sampling, a falling-limb sampler was designed based on principles of the rising limb siphon sampler. The rising limb sampler collects a discrete water sample when river stage exceeds the crown of the inlet tube, so long as the vent is unobstructed; obstruction of the siphon sampler vent was the key component of the falling limb sampler prototype design. There were a half-dozen iterations in design prior to the model which was field-deployed in the Leech WSA (winter 2019). Each design iteration included a valve on the siphon vent which remained closed as the river rose, and opened when stream stage dropped below a certain point (allowing air to exit the sample bottle and a water sample to be collected). A number of valve options were explored, including: an external tube plug, in internal tube plug, and a self-sealing silicone bite-valve (i.e. Camelback Big Bite (TM) for hydration packs). The final design iteration used a tube pinch valve (SP Science) to close and open the air vent. The mechanism that triggers the vent valve to open is a simple fixed pulley, where the valve is connected to a weighted-cup by a wire that passes through two loops which alter the direction of force.  The river rises and fills the cup with stream water, the cup remains full when the river recedes, and when the stream drops low enough that the full cup is no longer buoyant, the weight of water in the cup exerts a force on the lever of the pinch-valve, causing it to release the vent tube and triggering sample collection. The vent valve and trigger mechanism are contained in a 4" sewer pipe (a "filling well"), which was attached to supplemental support bars on each of the four vertical racks on mainstem rivers (Research sites 3-6). 