CRD forWater VIU+UBC meeting
June 24 Meeting Agenda

1. quick overview of May 28 meeting
2. HMc MSc plan for summer 2019 + fall/winter 2019/2020
	Reservoirs and Lake sampling (summer)
	Network-wide treatability sample sharing
	storm profiling fall + winter
	acquiring Tobi's data to supplement my own
	Currently measured parameters – are we missing any keys?
		dissolved organic carbon, DOC (focus)
		nitrate, turbidity, TOC (supplemental)
		option to add phosphate to analysis 
		network-wide treatability sample sharing
			disinfection by-product formation potential (U.Calg)
			natural Organic Matter characterization (U.AB)
			colloid / sediment surface charge (U.W)
			fine sediments and transport of contaminants (U.W)

3. Discussions beyond my MSc
	should another student be recruited
	collaborative goals

Hannah McSorley MSc Leech Water Supply Research, UBC & VIU
Summer sampling plan	
1. Rivers
	Continue to sample streams on a regular basis to collect summer baseflow data
	Measure cross-sectional areas of each stream channel at vertical racks 
		For discharge calculations in the fall/winter
	Add temperature sensors to each river rack installation (one in stream, one in air)
		Hobo TidbiTs, air sensors to be equipped with radiation shields
	Continue working on falling limb siphon sampler for deployment in late summer
	
2. Reservoirs and Lakes
		1. Deception Gulch (possible future reservoir for Leech River water)
		2. Weeks Lake (headwaters of Leech River)
		3. Jarvis Lake (headwaters of Cragg Creek)
		water and sediment sampling	
			integrated depth sampling in photic zone
				share samples with forWater algae and treatability folks 
				collect temp, EC, etc.
				stream side alkalinity and phosphate (HACH digital titrator)?
			benthic sediment sample collection for Mike Stone?
				particulate-bound phosphate and internal loading
	
Questions for June 24 meeting with CRD
	1. Where does the tunnel actually terminate? In Deception Gulch (at depth or near surface) or in a stream that feeds it?
	2. How is this work meaningful to CRD & how can we frame it to be most meaningful?
	3. Does Kapoor Lumber give a heads-up about harvest, is there any planned near the watershed for next year?
		*one way to frame the value of protecting the water supply is to compare it to harvest (the alternative)
		Note: Kapoor owns part of the land the CRD roads cross to access the Sooke Water Supply Area
	
	
Tobi -- I'd like to discuss stream gauging, data sharing, PhD and career options	
	
	
	
